Good morning, Rich Woods.
All right.
I don't know if I'd say Merry Christmas yet or wait till tomorrow or is that Wednesday?
I'm really confused about the whole thing.
I have been since pre Thanksgiving, but here we are nonetheless.
If you're a guest with us this morning, I'm really glad you're here.
My name's Chatham, Lee Pastor here.
We've got one heck of a four days for you.
And I think it starts this morning.
It'd be really, really easy.
I was telling my team this morning.
We pray together just over there in the meeting room every Sunday morning.
was telling man it'd be really easy to hop right over today and get to tomorrow.
Really, really easy, right?
Because we've got all these things playing for tomorrow and Tuesday and Wednesday and we're inviting everybody we know.
And we've got people in our church, a lady sent me a message that said, they've invited 60 people to Richwoods Christmas service, 60.
I don't even have that many friends.
I don't have to make up some of your names to invite 60 people.
Like, that's incredible, man.
But what that is, it's getting
the mission and vision we had for Christmas this year, right?
Our mission and vision isn't to put on a show.
We actually want to present Jesus and Him crucified and Him resurrected to your friends and family who do not know Him.
We'll have a beautiful time.
We'll light candles.
We'll sing beautiful songs.
But the mission from the beginning was how can we get thousands of people here to hear the gospel?
And so that is what we are gonna do, but we don't wanna jump over what God has for us today as we talk about the next part of Advent for us is this idea of love.
And I want to talk real quick about love, but with conditions.
Most of us think we understand love.
We use the word constantly, right?
I love my family, I love my church, I love pizza, I love the Chicago Bears.
At least last night you did, you won't next week though, right?
It comes and goes, right?
But if you were a first century Jewish listener, you would assume something very different about love than we do today.
You see the first century Jewish person, the days of Jesus, they would assume some very different things than we would
about love, they would assume love had clear boundaries.
And it didn't seem to them to be wrong.
In the first century Jewish world, love was primarily understood through covenant loyalty, not emotion.
Most of our love is emotion, and the part we struggle with is the covenant.
55% of Americans get divorced.
because covenant wasn't talked about at the beginning.
And so love is more of an emotion.
It's what I feel.
It's what's going on.
For the Jewish first century person, love would have meant covenant loyalty much more than emotion.
Love meant faithfulness to those who belong to your people, your family, your tribe, your nation, your religious community.
You were commanded to love your neighbor, but everyone knew the unspoken question was this, who qualifies as my neighbor?
See, love had limits in the first century Jewish community.
It was love your neighbor, but love those who shared your bloodline, love those who shared your faith, love those who kept the law as you did.
Those were your neighbors, and therefore those you were commanded to love.
But outsiders, Gentiles, Samaritans, sinners, Roman occupiers, who they would have been surrounded by soldiers, they were not objects of love.
At best, they were tolerated.
At worst, they were enemies.
Then Jesus shows up.
A Jewish man shows up.
And instead of redefining
who deserves love, which I think is what the Jewish, especially Pharisees, expected Jesus to do.
You're gonna be the rabbi of rabbis.
You're gonna be the Lord of glory.
So you're going to redefine who deserves and who earns your love.
Instead of doing that, he redefined what love is.
He tells people, including the first century Jew and us today, that we are to love our enemies.
We're to touch the unclean.
We're to eat with sinners.
We're to heal Romans.
That's right.
The ones who oppress you, I want you to heal them.
He tells stories where the hero is a Samaritan.
In other words, Jesus introduces a kind of love that no longer stops at family, ethnicity, morality or reciprocity.
It was a love without limits.
We still have a hard time with it today, even in the church.
I wanna read our host passage today.
It comes from one John chapter four, and this is how John the beloved described love to New Testament believers.
Beloved, let us love one another for love is from God.
And whoever loves has been born of God and knows God.
And anyone who does not love does not know God because God
is love.
In this, the love of God was manifest among us that God sent His only son into the world that we might live through Him.
In this is love.
Not that we have loved God, but that He loved us and sent His son to be the propitiation of our sins, for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
No one has ever seen God.
If we love one another, God abides in us and his love is perfected in us.
You see, we're going to break this down.
This idea of love without limits and to do so to properly reflect on love during Advent.
We must begin where John the beloved does in one John four.
He says love is from God.
And this is what he had to get through to the, to the Jewish
First century people was, I need to tell you, first and foremost, where love comes from, right?
Because if it comes from you, then it's gonna have those boundaries.
If it comes from you, it's gonna have its parameters.
If it comes from you, there's gonna be people that are within and there's gonna be people that were without, but I need to make sure you understand who created love and where it comes from.
And he says, love is from God, right?
One John, chapter four, verse seven, beloved, let us love one another for love is from God.
And T. Wright said, love is not simply something God does, it is who God is and what God calls us to become.
Maybe you've heard it this way, once you put your faith and trust in Jesus Christ as your Lord and Savior, that is when you begin a journey of becoming a person of love.
Just ask yourself, the day you met Jesus, till now, how much have you become more
of a person of love.
Because what we're supposed to be doing as we get changed by Jesus from the inside out is every single day, every single week, every single year, we're supposed to be growing in understanding the height, breadth, depth, and length of the love of God.
And it never stops.
It's not like you get to 75 and be like, man, I've got all the love of God stuff down.
It's not possible.
We are continuously becoming people of love.
Here's the idea.
Without God, we would not be aware of love.
Have a way to define love or have any concept of its power.
It's why those outside of a relationship with Jesus Christ, the first 21 years of my life, I didn't understand what love was.
I said it to females so I could get what I want, right?
I said it to friends as long as they were friendly.
I would say it to my parents after they gave me money to go to the gas station, right?
It's an exchange.
I didn't know what love was.
I remember after I met Jesus Christ, there was this pastor, mentor, friend of mine, Pastor Frank, who sat me down.
And I said, Frank, I don't know what love is.
I'm telling this girlfriend at the time, wasn't Jenna, it was somebody else.
And I'm telling her I love her, but I don't know if I really do.
And he said, let me tell you the difference between lust and love.
Four weeks in, I broke up with my girlfriend.
Because I wasn't loving her.
And I went on a journey to learn what love was.
And thankfully I did that and continue to do that when I met my wife.
You see, through God, we, like Forrest Gump said, I know what love is.
Do you ever see that movie?
Good for you, right?
But we know what love is.
We have an idea of love because it comes from God.
One John chapter four verse 19, later in the scriptures, it says, we love because what?
He first loved us.
If you love anybody, if you love your enemy, if you love your spouse, if you love your kids, if you love them the way the Bible describes love, it is not because you are all that in a bag of chips.
It's because God
First loved you and has shaped you into the person of love he wants you to be.
How can I love my enemy?
Because God loved you when you were his enemy.
We learn it through him.
Now God started this process and I think it's easy to miss that.
God starts the process.
It isn't we love God and then God loves us.
He's like, I love you and you're gonna catch up as we go.
When he loved us,
He enabled us to respond to him in love and to extend that love to other Christians and to other people.
Every time you extend love to someone without limits, you are extending it from someone who gave it to you.
Tim Keller of Pride describes it better than I ever can.
And he said this before his passing.
He said, the gospel is this, we are more sinful and flawed in ourselves than we ever dare believe.
If you walked in here this morning, you're like, I am a terrible sinner.
It's worse than that.
It's worse than you ever imagined.
Yet at the same very, at the very same time, the same time, we are more loved and accepted in Jesus Christ than we ever dared hope.
Here is freedom, brothers and sisters in Christ.
We respond to God's love because He does all the initiating, right?
Not in reverse.
Some of us are still trying to earn the love of God, which is an impossibility, instead of letting Him initiate all the love, and we respond accordingly.
Some of us are still trying to love an enemy, someone who hurt us, someone who may be past that we still have wounds with, instead of letting God love us to the point that we are compelled to extend that love.
Now, not only is love from God, that would be one thing, right?
If God created love, what John tells us in one John is that God is love.
It's not just an attribute, it's not just something he does really well,
If you don't know God as your savior, let me tell you a major, major, major piece about him.
He is love.
In one John chapter four verse eight, it says, anyone who does not love does not know God.
Why?
Because God is love.
I want you to notice what John does not say.
John does not say anyone who does not believe the right things does not know God.
You hear that?
Here's how we define if someone knows God.
Well, have they believed the gospel, the death barrel resurrection of Christ, instead of prayer, making him the Lord of your life.
That's how we know, right?
That's how we know.
Man, is someone a believer?
Well, did they believe these truths and then make him the Lord of your life?
And God does not define it that way.
In one John, chapter four, verse eight, he says, anyone who does not love does not know God.
You see, John's making it clear, it isn't about believing the right things.
Or he doesn't say anyone who does not obey perfectly does not know God.
Well, it's them obeying perfectly.
Those are who knows God.
He says, if love is absent, don't miss us.
The knowledge of God is absent.
This is why we can look at others and we can judge them by their fruit.
Man, for a believer, he sure does hate a lot of people.
It's an oxymoron.
The two things cannot coexist.
It's not just a flaw.
If you do not know love and you don't love, then you do not know God because God is love.
Here's what I know about someone who is a follower of Jesus.
Love is not something they have to muster up.
It's something that was born in them when they were born again.
Now it grows and you learn more and you grow over time, right?
And you become more of a person of love.
But we look and say, man, do you believe and do you obey?
You're fine.
You can get baptized instead of, man, do they love?
See love is the evidence of knowing God, which means the reverse is also true.
Love is the evidence of knowing God.
And here's why this would have shocked a Jewish listener at the time.
For a first century Jew, knowing God was primarily demonstrated through covenant membership, through Torah, observation, right?
Just as Exodus, the Vatican's numbers, Deuteronomy, that's the Torah.
Faithfulness to Israel's law and identity.
This is how you knew that someone knew God, that they were a God follower.
is that they had covenant membership with God, they had Torah observance, and they were faithful to the law and identity of Israel.
But John does something radical here.
He does not say anyone who does not keep the law does not know God.
He doesn't.
He says, anyone who does not love does not know God.
And what's this do?
It refrains spiritual identity.
The defining evidence of knowing God, and I think we need more of this today, is no longer ethnic, ceremonial or legal.
It is relational and transformational.
Make sure you get that.
The defining evidence of knowing God is not sitting in that chair.
It's not taking that bread and juice.
It's not putting money in that box.
It's not serving in kids, although bless them for their service.
It is not inviting 50, 60 people to Christmas services.
It's not.
Knowing God, right?
Knowing God is relational.
and transformational.
I know God because I am becoming more of a person of love.
That's how you know.
And it's not really hard to figure out.
I can do it in my life.
I can go back to when I was an earlier believer and there were certain people that I didn't love.
I was okay with them.
I knew I couldn't hate them because I'm a Christian now.
But I didn't love them.
I didn't love them because of their actions.
I didn't love them because of their mouth.
I didn't love them because of who they slept with.
I didn't love them because of what they did in their private time.
You see, love is relational.
To a Jewish ear, this would have sounded like this.
Love is not just a command from God.
Love is the clearest window into who God is, and therefore, check this out.
Lovelessness is not a minor failure.
It is a theological contradiction.
And we inside the church, if you're a guest with us, let me just tell you our offense.
Here's our offense.
Here's why you probably have something against us.
We treat lovelessness as just a minor flaw.
Yeah, we could do better.
Instead, God looks at it and says, for my people, lovelessness of anybody is a contradiction that they know God.
It is a serious matter, which is why when you have the woman caught in adultery and she's there and all those great theologians and Pharisees are there, Jesus points to them and says, hey, you go ahead, you without sin, throw the first stone.
And I think what Jesus is saying, you sin because you are loveless.
You are loveless, right?
Particle application for us in this room, you do not know God if you are not becoming a person of love.
And I say that with all the love in the world.
Can I look back
Not at my theology, not at my doctrine, not at my Bible knowledge, not how many people this, not how much that.
But can I look back at the person I was and the person I am now and see love at work?
And that will help us know since God is love, if we are also people of love.
See, God doesn't stop though with just defining love and being love himself.
He then also teaches us that love takes action, right?
Love is a verb, right?
We've said it.
But here's how John writes it in first, John.
He says, in this, the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only son into the world.
There's the action so that we might live through him in this is love, not that we have loved God, but he loved us and sent
his son to be the propitiation for our sins.
Check this out.
Let's unpack this for a little bit.
If I've heard it once, I've heard it a thousand times.
How can a loving God blank, right?
Come on, tell me you've heard that.
How can a loving God send people to hell?
You've heard it.
If you've been around the block, I've heard it a thousand times because of my profession.
Oh, God is love.
And how can he send people to hell?
If God is love, how can a loving God allow evil to prevail in this world?
Is he not watching?
How can he just let that shooting happen in Australia?
How can he let that happen at Brown University?
How can he just let this evil happen?
How can an actor or a director and his wife be in their house in their own son murder them allegedly?
How can he be a loving God and just let these things hang?
How can he let 9-11 happen?
How can he let a pandemic happen?
How can God be loving?
How can a loving God allow evil to prevail?
How can a loving God feel so distant when I need him so much?
How can a loving God not save people who have never heard about him?
I've heard that one all the time.
What about the tribes that are in some jungle that have no Bible, have no technology, never had anybody come tell them, you're telling me they will spend eternity separated from God?
Because what?
They didn't live in America?
Most of these questions assume that love means the absence of pain limits or accountability.
And so you may hear those questions and be like, man, I hope you're going to tell us what to do with all that.
Because genuinely, like that's a problem.
People ask me that.
But scripture presents God's love not as permissiveness, but as purposeful.
holy and redemptive.
Listen to how Martin Luther said it, and then I'm going to help you a little bit.
God's love does not prevent suffering.
It redeems it.
While we're blaming, God is out redeeming.
Right?
So let's unpack this a bit further.
God, let's go way back, right?
Let's go way back to the beginning of your Bible, the beginning of creation, right?
We don't know exactly when creation began.
We don't know if there's a gap between Genesis 1-1 and Genesis 1-2.
We don't know all those kind of things.
But what we know is that when God made everything, God made it gorgeous.
God made it beautiful.
God made it holy.
God made it perfect.
God created men and women and they were flawless.
Creation is beautiful, it's ordered, it's given a purpose, and it's in perfect communion with its creator.
That is Genesis 1.
That is Genesis 2.
That lasted for a while.
It was perfect.
They were gonna refill and replenish the earth and fill it with sons and daughters of God, and they were gonna walk with God in the cool of the day forever and ever and ever, right?
So read Genesis 1 and 2 and read it from the eyes of like, that's who God is.
Because then what's gonna happen is when you get to Genesis three, you're gonna see who we are.
Because in Genesis one one, all the way to Genesis two at the end, there is undeniable that God is love.
It's undeniable.
But after Genesis three, we start asking the question, if God is so loving then, and what happened to Genesis three?
Man rebelled against God.
God didn't rebel against man.
He chooses to sin and he opens a Pandora's box.
And what's inside that box?
Death, chaos, and the destruction of communion with God that was shared between Creator and all of creation.
What do you say to someone who says, if God is love, then what the heck?
Here's what you say.
Sin exists because of the creation, not the Creator.
Did God go in that house in the Hollywood Hills and kill those people?
Did God take that gun to Bondi Beach?
Did God fly those planes?
Did God create that cancer or did we?
Sin never exists till man disobeys in Genesis chapter three.
Not God, man, us.
Wars exist, why?
Because of the creation, not the creator.
Death exists, why?
Brokenness exists, why?
Because of the creation, not the creator.
Suffering exists, why?
Because of the creation.
Not the Creator.
Godlessness exists.
Why?
Because of the creation.
Not the Creator.
Selfishness exists.
Why?
Because of the creation.
Not the Creator.
Why when someone passes?
Does it hurt so much?
Because we were never designed to have to handle it.
We weren't designed for it.
I was with a family on Tuesday, their loved one committed suicide.
I was with them yesterday in Canton while they say goodbye to his body.
All that destruction, all that pain, all that hurt, all that trauma will last and last and it happened a week before Christmas.
Right?
God didn't do that.
We brought that into our world.
See, God is holy, just, love, and has never in all of eternity committed one sin ever.
Yet when bad things happen, we question the Creator instead of examining the history of us, the created.
Furthermore, despite having zero responsibility for the world's brokenness, guess what God does?
And this should be our answer.
If God is so loving, then what about this?
And our answer should be he takes action, even though he didn't do it.
We're not without hope.
That family yesterday is not without hope.
If you lose someone, you're not without hope.
He says in Titus chapter three, verse four, but, but how good is that three letter word in scripture?
When the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior appeared, He saved us not because of works done by us and righteousness, but according to His own mercy.
Check this out.
God redeems what is broken even though He didn't cause the brokenness.
And what is that?
That's love.
And it should inspire us to love without limits ourselves, right?
God redeems what is broken even though he didn't cause the brokenness.
So what can we do as people of love?
We can help redeem the brokenness even though we didn't cause the brokenness.
We can step into the mess of people's lives.
We can step into the doubts.
We can step into the questions if we are becoming people of love and say, hey, here I am on behalf of God to love you without limits.
Love you without limits because of your sin.
Love you without limits because of your heirs.
Love you without limits because of your mistakes.
Because God redeemed my brokenness.
I can step into yours, right?
That's what this season's all about.
That's what it's all about.
A God coming into the brokenness he did not cause to redeem.
the brokenness and make it whole.
Love comes from God.
God himself is love.
True love takes action even when it didn't commit the offense.
And last but certainly not least, John tells us this, love can be without limit.
It can.
Love can be without limit.
Here's what he says in one John chapter four.
Beloved, if God so loved us, what should happen?
We also ought to love one another.
No one has ever seen God.
If we love one another, God abides in us and his love is perfected in us.
Here's the point.
If God is love and his people are becoming people of love, even though people have never seen God,
God abides in us and therefore they can see God through you.
Now that's power.
That's influence.
That's impact.
This is where the first Jewish, first century Jewish person would not understand that if you become a person of love, who do you show the world?
God.
Every single time you love your enemy, you show the world.
God, every time you show someone who does not deserve love, love, you show them God.
Every time you show up to brokenness in a house that has just been destroyed by death, what do you show the world?
Love.
When I left the funeral home yesterday, this was the most humbling thing ever.
I'm telling you, it was so impactful.
I'm talking to the sister of the guy who passed, and she said this to me.
She said, we were talking the other day thinking, what if Pastor Chad had met our brother sooner?
What does that tell you?
People are looking, looking, looking for signs of God through us, through you.
It's why we've encouraged you to invite your friends, families, coworkers, and neighbors to Christmas Eve, to Christmas Eve Eve Eve Eve, right?
All the things.
Why do three service over three days?
It's not because I'm bored.
It's not because we just want to fill rooms.
It's because you, as a people of love, can go out to those who are wondering, where is God in all this mess?
And you can say, come, let me show you him.
Come, hear about him.
Dallas Woolard said this.
The greatest issue facing the world today is whether those who claim to be Christians will become disciples.
Students, apprentices, practitioners of Jesus Christ.
Listen, steadily learning from him how to live the life of love.
And I know Christmas is just around the corner, but it's not too late.
It's not too late.
It's not too late to go out and live the life of love today.
It's Christmas, like everybody's happy.
You are living in a cave if you think that's true.
Here's what happens in a broken world.
When a weary world rejoices,
as so many will.
You know what it says to those who are deeply broken?
I'm even more without hope.
What does all of our gatherings tell an individual who has nothing?
They have even less than nothing than they thought.
This time of year is as happy and as joyous as it gets.
I can't wait for Christmas Eve at the Manback House.
I'm going to preach you all the word of God.
I'm going to say amen.
I'm going to give you hugs even though I don't want them because you're going to force them on me anyway because it's Christmas.
And then I'm going to leave here.
We're going to get some Chinese food and we're going to rejoice as a Manback family.
And it's going to be bomb.com.
I ain't going to answer your text.
I ain't going to get your phone calls.
I'm gone.
People and dog in my house are gonna fill my life.
But how many will look at us do that and think, see, I have nothing.
I have nothing.
I believe the Easter Christmas Mother's Day, Father's Day, holidays like that,
are the most important time for us to love without limit because the brokenness reveals itself.
You're not just inviting people to a Christmas service.
You're inviting them to meet the greatest lover that ever existed in the person of Jesus Christ.
You see, we have to learn to live the life
of love.
John 1335 says, by this, all people will know that you are my disciples if you memorize a lot of Bible.
If you attend Richard's Christian Church, note if you are a covenant member of a local church, if you give financially, if you have Christian artifacts on your wall, if you wear a cross necklace, note by this, all people will know you are my disciples if you have love for one another.
But I don't think oftentimes we believe it.
And I think we don't believe it because we're like, yeah, I love sometimes and no one becomes a disciple of Jesus because of it.
That's love in your power.
What if you love without limit?
Go love your enemy and see what happens.
Send a text to someone that thinks for certain your relationship is broken forever.
I can't do it.
You don't know what they did.
I keep growing in love.
First Corinthians chapter 13 verse two says, and if I have prophetic powers and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, Paul said, and if I have all faith so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I have what?
I'm nothing.
There's a ton of talent around this place, but without love, it's nothing.
One Peter, chapter four verse eight says, above all, above all, keep loving one another earnestly.
Why?
Because love covers a multitude of sins.
Before we sing this last song, I have two questions for you to process.
I hope you won't wait till after Christmas to process them.
And here they are.
What area of your life are you not living as a person of love?
Think about it from a first century Jewish context.
Why did Jesus go to that well on the outskirts of Samaria?
Well, many reasons, but one, to show his disciples, my love has no limits.
Who's your Samaritan?
who lives in Samaria.
What area of your life are you not living as a person of love?
And don't feel that as like, oh, I'm the worst person ever, no.
Grow in love.
I wish I had time to unpack for you the people, the types of people, the looks of people that now I'm like,
madly in love with that 20 years ago, I would have avoided like the plague.
Was I a horrible person back then?
No.
I was being shaped into a personal love and I still have so far to go.
And then lastly, what is the most loving thing you could do over the course of the next four days?
It's the most loving thing you can do over the course of the next four days.
I've invited tons of people to Christmas Eve services.
A lot of them are coming.
I'm pretty pumped.
There's one guy left I have to invite.
His name's Caesar.
He's the only waiter that we'll get at Los Cabos.
After second service, we're going to tear this place down.
We're going to rebuild it for you tomorrow.
We're going to rehearse.
We got all these things to do.
I got a million things to do at home like you.
But before this day ends, I've got to love assignment.
I got to go to Los Cabos.
And I got to put a card in Caesar's hand.
And I got to tell him that the most honoring thing he can do for Christmas is come hear me preach.
It's that simple.
What is the most loving thing you can do over the course of the next four days?
Maybe it's saying, I'm sorry.
Maybe it's shooting a text.
Maybe it's a phone call.
Maybe it's humbling yourself and saying to your spouse, my bad.
For me, it's driving over to a restaurant to get the one.
because I made a covenant with myself.
No matter how busy a God I would get to him.
It's that easy to love without limits.
Let me pray for us.
Then we're gonna sing a song you'll be dismissed today.
Father, thank you.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
For telling us and showing us what love is.
for being a God who isn't just loving, but is love himself.
Thank you for love coming to earth in the person of your son, Jesus Christ.
Thank you for living the way you did, dying the way you did, resurrecting the way you did, putting love on display.
You initiate love within us, God.
So I know that in this room right now, if we are going to become people of love,
then you're gonna have to do it.
And so Holy Spirit, I pray that you remove in this room and break our hearts.
Break our hearts for the people that maybe we haven't been loving to.
For those in this room who maybe don't have a relationship with you, they're not people of love.
I pray that you would break their heart to wanna know you.
because you can redeem them from all the destruction that we cause so many years ago.
God, I pray for my brothers and sisters in Christ that they will recognize the moment.
They will see how hurting people are in the midst of all the joy.
And they will go and try and bring in as many sheep as they can to hear the message of your cradle and your cross and what that could do this Christmas season.
God convict us of the ways in which we have not loved.
Show us the people that we have not loved and help us to love them the way you do.
Do your work in this room in Jesus' name.
Amen.
We stand and worship with us.